Night came beneath the trees as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a
pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a wide treeless
space before them, running in a great circle and bending away on either
hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its
brink was green,_as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone.
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in
all the land. Their height could not be guessed, but they stood up in the
twilight like living towers. In_their, many-tiered branches and amid their
ever-moving leaves countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company.
`Welcome to Caras Galadhon! ' he said. 'Here is the city of the
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of Lurien.
But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go
round to the southern side, and the way is not short, for the city is
great.'
There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer brink of
the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever climbing up
like a green cloud_upon their left; and_as the night deepened more lights
sprang forth, until all the hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last
to a white bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they
faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall that here
overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened soundlessly; but of
guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and the gates
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could
they see, nor hear any feet upon the_paths; but there were many voices,
about them, and in the air above. Far away up on the hill they could hear

the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they came to
the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering.
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell
into a basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south
side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its great
smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, until its first
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.
Beside it a broad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were
seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they
were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.
'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,' said Haldir. `It is their wish
that you should ascend and speak with them.'
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and it
was answered three times from far above_. `I will go first,' said Haldir.
'Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they
wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs,
but you may rest upon the way.'
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some
on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so that the ladder
passed through them. At a great height above the ground he came to a wide
talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that
almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth. He entered
behind Haldir, and found that he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the
midst of which grew the trunk_of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were green and
silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two chairs
beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after
the manner of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall
they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and
beautiful. They were clad wholly in white; and the_hair of the Lady was of
deep gold, and the hair_of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright;
but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their
eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the
wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his own
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no_word but looked long upon his face.
`Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! ' said Celeborn. `When
all have come we will speak together.'
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they entered.
`Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight and thirty years
of the world outside since you came to this land; and those years lie heavy
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for
a while! '
'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from
the North.'
`Welcome Gimli son of Gluin! It is long indeed since we saw one of
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our long law. May
it be a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand, and
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked at
them again. 'Here_there are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said
the messages. But maybe there has been some change of counsel that we have
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this
year the shadows have grown longer.'
`Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's
wont. `Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the
borders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to speak
with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he_comes within the
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and
of his mind are hidden from me.'
'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf_the Grey fell into shadow. He remained
in Moria and did not escape.'
At these words all_the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir.
`Why has nothing of this_been told to me before? ' he asked in the
Elven-tongue.
'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,' said
Legolas. `At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and
afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness
on the fair paths of Lurien.'
`Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,' said Frodo.
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escape
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn:
Then Aragorn_recounted all that had happened upon the pass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and his
book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow
bridge, and the coming of the Terror. 'An evil of the Ancient World it
seemed, such as I have never seen before,' said Aragorn. `It was both a
shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.'
'It was a Balrog__ of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of all elf-banes the most
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'
`Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams l
saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes.
'Alas! ' said Celeborn. `We long have feared that under Caradhras a
terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil in
Moria again, l would have_forbidden you to pass the northern borders, you
and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at
the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net
of Moria.'
`He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely.
`Needless were_none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him
knew not his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be
with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent of your welcome
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from_Lothlurien, who
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not
wish
to look upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
'Dark is the_water of Kheled-zvram, and cold are the springs of
Kibil-nvla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dym in Elder
Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.' She looked upon
Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the
names given in his own ancient tongue, looked up and met her eyes; and it
seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heart of an enemy and saw
there love and understanding.